== COMPA USER MANUAL ==

Compa is a universal companion device for USB music gear running on
Raspberry Pi. It turns a Pi with a touchscreen into a central hub for
hardware samplers, grooveboxes, and any USB audio device. This manual
covers every feature, screen, and workflow in detail.


== SUPPORTED DEVICES ==

Compa recognizes the following devices by their USB descriptor and
automatically configures audio routing, MIDI mapping, and format
conversion for each one.

Roland P-6
  Audio: 2 inputs / 2 outputs at 44.1 kHz
  MIDI: Full CC control over granular engine, filter, envelope,
        mixer levels, and effects parameters
  Patterns: 64 pattern slots
  Features: Backup and restore of all pattern data

Roland SP-404 MK2
  Audio: 2 inputs / 4 outputs at 48 kHz
  MIDI: 5-bus FX control, looper parameters, DJ mode toggles
  Patterns: 16 pattern slots
  Features: Direct sample import to IMPORT folder on SD card

Akai MPC / Force
  Connection: Network (same LAN) or USB
  Export: XPM drum program files with formatted samples
  Features: Pad mapping, velocity layers, sample assignment

Any USB Audio Device
  Audio: Basic record and playback at the device native sample rate
  MIDI: Not available for generic devices
  Features: Record screen and sample tools still fully functional


== MULTI-DEVICE HUB ==

The Raspberry Pi has four USB ports. Compa can manage multiple devices
connected at the same time. Each device receives its own independent
MIDI connection and audio stream.

Switching Focus
  The navigation bar at the top of every screen shows the names of all
  connected devices. Tap a device name to switch focus to it. The
  focused device determines which parameters appear on the Control
  screen, which pattern grid layout is used, and which format is
  selected for sample export.

Audio Routing Between Devices
  Open Settings > Audio Routing > START to route audio from one device
  to another. Compa handles sample rate conversion automatically. For
  example, you can route the output of an SP-404 MK2 at 48 kHz into
  a P-6 recording at 44.1 kHz without any manual configuration.

MIDI Clock Relay
  When enabled in Settings, Compa relays MIDI clock from a designated
  master device to all other connected devices. This keeps every unit
  locked to the same tempo without external sync hardware.


== SCREEN 1: SESSION ==

The Session screen is the main dashboard. It appears when Compa starts
and provides an overview of everything happening in your setup.

Transport Bar
  Shows the current BPM, play/stop state, and active pattern number
  for every connected device. Tap BPM to edit it. Tap play/stop to
  toggle transport for the focused device.

Resample Calculator
  Enter a source BPM and a target BPM. Compa calculates the exact
  playback speed ratio and the resulting sample length. Useful when
  resampling loops between different tempos.

Session Notes
  A free-text area for jotting down ideas, patch names, or anything
  you want to remember about the current session. Notes are saved
  automatically with the session file.

Backup and Restore
  For supported devices (P-6, SP-404 MK2), you can back up all
  pattern data and device settings to the Pi SD card. Restore loads
  a previous backup onto the device. Backups are timestamped and
  stored in ~/compa/backups/.


== SCREEN 2: CONTROL ==

The Control screen presents a grid of parameter knobs that adapt to
the focused device. Turning a knob sends the corresponding MIDI CC
message in real time.

Roland P-6 Parameters
  Granular: grain size, grain density, grain position, scatter
  Filter: cutoff, resonance, filter type, envelope amount
  Envelope: attack, decay, sustain, release
  Mixer: track volume, pan, mute, solo
  FX: reverb send, delay send, delay time, delay feedback

Roland SP-404 MK2 Parameters
  Tabbed layout — one tab per FX bus + Looper + DJ Mode + LFO + Clock.

  Bus 1-4 FX  — full FX selector (tap the prev/next arrows to walk
                the 38-effect SP list; tap the name banner to toggle
                the bus on/off) + the six control knobs (CC#16-18,
                CC#80-82). Each bus is its own MIDI channel.
  Input FX    — same UI for the SP's input bus on Ch5.
  Looper      — performance layout. Status badge at top infers state
                (READY / RECORDING / PLAYING / OVERDUBBING) from the
                CCs we sent. Marquee REC button smart-toggles to
                STOP RECORDING while a take is in progress. Below it:
                OVERDUB and STOP secondary row, then UNDO / REDO /
                DELETE / RESET TEMPO utility row, then a Play Rate
                knob (CC#90, 64 = normal). Hint reminds you to enable
                the looper on the SP unit first.
  DJ Mode     — split-deck console. Two decks side by side: each has
                its own deck label header (DECK A on Ch1, DECK B on
                Ch2), vertical volume fader (drag-aware), 6-button
                transport (PLAY/PAUSE/CUE/SYNC/BEND±), and a per-
                deck FX rack identical to Bus 1/2 layout (the deck
                FX is literally Bus 1 / Bus 2). Crossfader runs the
                full width below both decks; the thumb color blends
                from Deck A accent to Deck B accent based on its
                position. Tracks must already be on the SP's SD card
                (SP-404 firmware requirement, not a Compa limit).

Generic USB Devices
  No parameter knobs are available for unrecognized devices. The
  Control screen displays a message indicating that MIDI CC mapping
  is not supported for the connected device.


== SCREEN 3: PATTERN ==

The Pattern screen shows a grid of pattern slots. The grid layout
adapts to the focused device.

Roland P-6 Layout
  8 columns by 8 rows = 64 pattern slots. Tap a slot to select it
  as the active pattern. Long-press to copy, paste, or clear a
  pattern.

Roland SP-404 MK2 Layout
  4 columns by 4 rows = 16 pattern slots. Same tap and long-press
  behavior as the P-6 layout. Below the grid, a transport bar:
    PLAY     — sends MIDI Start to the SP (kicks the active pattern)
    STOP     — sends MIDI Stop
    ? RECORD — opens an overlay with step-by-step instructions for
               recording, overdubbing, and step-editing patterns on
               the SP itself (REC has to be triggered on the unit;
               Compa drives transport but can't initiate REC over MIDI)

Chain / Song Mode
  Tap the Chain button to enter chain mode. Select multiple patterns
  in order to build a chain. Compa sends pattern-change messages at
  the correct bar boundaries so transitions are seamless.

Step Sequencer
  Tap the SEQ button to open the step sequencer overlay. The
  sequencer displays 16 steps per bar. Tap a step to toggle it on
  or off. Hold a step and turn a knob on the Control screen to set
  per-step parameter locks.


== SCREEN 4: RECORD ==

The Record screen captures audio from any connected device.

IN Source Selector
  Tap the IN button to choose which device to record from. The list
  shows all connected USB audio devices plus the radio stream.

Recall Buffer
  Compa continuously captures recent audio from the selected source
  into a circular buffer (default 60 seconds, configurable in
  Settings up to 30 minutes). The RCL button on each device card
  shows the current buffer fill (e.g. "RCL 47s" while it warms up,
  then "RCL 60s" once full). Tap RCL to save the buffer contents
  as a new take. This means you never lose a good moment.

+REC (Recall + Continue)
  The +REC button next to RCL combines recall with live recording.
  Tap it once and Compa dumps the entire recall buffer to a new WAV
  file AND keeps recording into that same file until you press STOP.
  One seamless take starting from "the moment I forgot to hit record"
  all the way through whatever you do next. The file's metadata
  sidecar tags it with started_via=recall_continue so DAWs and your
  future self can see what kind of file it is.

Pre-Roll on REC (alternative to +REC)
  Settings has a "Pre-roll on REC" row. Set it above 0 and every
  normal REC press silently prepends that many seconds of recall
  audio before the live recording starts. Default is OFF (clean cut
  at REC press). Common useful values: 5s for "give me a beat or two
  of lead-in," 30s for "I want the whole jam I just built." Capped
  at the recall buffer length — can't pre-roll longer than what's
  being captured.

Threshold Recording
  Enable threshold recording with the T button. Set the threshold
  level in Settings. When enabled, recording starts automatically
  the moment the input signal exceeds the threshold and stops after
  a configurable silence duration.

Auto-Record
  Press A or tap the Auto button to enable auto-record mode. In this
  mode, Compa starts recording whenever transport is started on the
  focused device and stops when transport stops.

Take Management
  Each recording is saved as a numbered take. The take list appears
  on the right side of the Record screen. Tap a take to preview it.
  Swipe left to delete. Tap the export icon to send a take to the
  Sample screen for editing.


== SCREEN 5: SAMPLE ==

The Sample screen provides tools for editing and exporting audio files.

File Browser
  Navigate the Pi filesystem to find recordings, imported samples,
  or any WAV file. The browser defaults to ~/compa/recordings/ but
  you can navigate anywhere.

Visual Waveform Slicer
  Load a file to see its waveform. Drag the start and end markers
  to define a region. Pinch to zoom on the touchscreen. The selected
  region is highlighted in color.

Auto-Slice
  Tap Auto-Slice to automatically detect transients and place slice
  markers at each hit. Adjust the sensitivity slider to capture more
  or fewer slices. Each slice becomes an individual sample.

Normalize
  Tap Normalize to bring the peak level of the selected region to
  0 dBFS. This ensures consistent volume across all your samples.

Trim
  Tap Trim to remove everything outside the selected region. The
  trimmed file replaces the original unless you choose Save As.

Export Formats
  Tap Export and choose a target format:
    P-6:     44.1 kHz, 16-bit, mono WAV
    SP-404:  48 kHz, 16-bit, stereo WAV (placed in IMPORT folder)
    MPC:     .xpm drum program with formatted sample files
    Ableton: .adg Drum Rack preset with referenced samples

  When exporting to a connected device, Compa transfers the file
  directly over USB. For Ableton export, files are saved to the
  Samba share for pickup from your Mac or PC.


== SCREEN 6: RADIO ==

The Radio screen provides access to internet radio stations for
discovering and capturing new music and sounds.

Station Library
  137 stations organized across 25 genres. Scroll through the genre
  tabs at the top and tap a station to start playback. The station
  name and current track info (when available) appear at the top.

Audio Routing for Radio
  Radio audio plays through the HDMI output. Recording from USB
  devices is independent, so you can listen to radio while
  recording from your sampler without any signal conflict.

Capture Buffer
  Like the Record screen, the Radio screen maintains a circular
  capture buffer. Tap Capture to save the last 60 seconds of radio
  audio as a WAV file.

Threshold Recording from Radio
  Enable threshold recording on the Radio screen to automatically
  capture segments that exceed the configured threshold level. This
  is useful for grabbing individual songs or segments from a
  continuous radio stream.


== SCREEN 7: KIT BUILDER ==

The Kit Builder screen lets you assemble multi-sample drum kits from
your recordings and export them to hardware or software.

Pad Grid
  A 4x4 grid of pads, with 8 banks available, giving you 128 pad
  slots total. Tap a pad to select it. The selected pad is
  highlighted.

Assigning Samples
  With a pad selected, tap Load to open the file browser and choose
  a sample. The sample waveform appears above the pad grid. You can
  trim the start and end points directly in Kit Builder.

Banks
  Tap the bank selector (A through H) to switch between banks. Each
  bank holds 16 pads. Use multiple banks to organize your kit by
  category: kicks on bank A, snares on bank B, and so on.

Export XPM (Akai MPC / Force)
  Tap Export > XPM to generate an Akai-compatible drum program. Compa
  creates the .xpm file and formats all assigned samples to the
  correct specifications. Transfer to your MPC or Force over the
  network or via USB.

Export ADG (Ableton)
  Tap Export > ADG to generate an Ableton Live Drum Rack preset. The
  .adg file and its referenced samples are saved to the Samba share.
  Drag the .adg file into an Ableton Live session to load the kit.


== SCREEN 8: SETTINGS ==

The Settings screen contains global configuration options.

Mouse Mode
  Toggle mouse mode on or off. When enabled, a visible cursor appears
  on screen and touch input behaves like a mouse with click events.
  Useful for debugging or when using a mouse instead of touch.

Auto-Record
  Enable or disable the auto-record feature globally. When on,
  recording begins and ends with the focused device transport.

Threshold Level
  Set the audio level (in dBFS) at which threshold recording is
  triggered. Lower values mean quieter sounds will trigger recording.
  A typical starting point is -30 dBFS.

Recall buffer length
  How many seconds of recent audio Compa keeps in its rolling buffer
  for the RCL and +REC buttons. Default 60s. Steps: 15s up to 60s,
  30s up to 5min, 60s up to the 30min ceiling. RAM cost is roughly
  23 MB per minute at 48 kHz stereo (e.g. 5min ≈ 115 MB, 30min ≈
  690 MB). Resize is live — monitoring briefly stops to swap the
  buffer safely. The buffer fill resets on resize.

Pre-roll on REC
  Default pre-roll length applied to every REC press. OFF (default)
  = clean start at the moment you tap REC. Anything above 0 silently
  prepends that many seconds from the recall buffer to the new file.
  Capped at the configured Recall buffer length. Smart steps: 5s
  increments up to 30s, then 10s up to 60s, then 30s up to your
  buffer length.

Silence Duration
  Set how many seconds of silence must elapse before threshold
  recording automatically stops. Default is 3 seconds.

Connected Devices
  A list of all currently connected USB devices with their audio
  configuration (sample rate, channels) and MIDI status.

Audio Routing
  Configure routing between devices. Select a source device and a
  destination device, then tap START. Compa inserts sample rate
  conversion automatically when the source and destination operate
  at different rates.

MIDI Clock Relay
  Select which device is the clock master. All other devices receive
  clock from the master through Compa. Disable relay to let each
  device run independently.

Touch Calibration
  Run the touch calibration wizard if the touchscreen is not
  registering taps accurately. Follow the on-screen prompts to tap
  the four corners and center of the display.

Video Recording
  Tap RECORD to start a screen recording of the Compa touchscreen
  (saved to ~/compa/videos/). Tap again to STOP. The Auto-demo
  walkthrough button cycles through every screen automatically with
  a recording running so you get a ~43 second tour video without
  any manual navigation.

Screenshots
  Three capture buttons in the SCREENSHOTS section, grouped with
  Video Recording:

    Push 2 screen — instant capture of the current Push 2 display
      frame. Saves to ~/compa/screenshots/ as
      push2_<device>_<mode>_<layout>_<page>_<timestamp>.png. The
      Push 2's display is independent of the touchscreen so no
      timer is needed.

    Compa screen (5s timer) — schedules a Compa touchscreen
      capture in 5 seconds. A small countdown badge appears in the
      top-right of the display while the timer runs so you can
      still see and tap any button to navigate to whichever screen
      you want captured. Saves to ~/compa/screenshots/ as
      compa_<screen>_<timestamp>.png (the device-workspace shot
      includes the focused device in the name).

    Both (5s timer) — schedules Compa + Push 2 captures to fire on
      the same tick. Useful for documenting matching states across
      both surfaces.

  The countdown badge is drawn AFTER the screenshot save, so the
  saved Compa PNG is the clean fully-composed UI without the
  countdown visible. The badge does appear in any in-progress
  video recording (so playback shows when the timer fired).


== SCREEN 9: HELP ==

The Help screen contains a searchable reference manual. Type a keyword
into the search bar to find relevant sections. The help content mirrors
this document and is generated from the same source.


== PUSH 2 INTEGRATION ==

Compa drives an Ableton Push 2 over USB as a dedicated controller surface
for whichever device is focused. Plug the Push 2 in via USB; Compa picks
it up automatically (no Live, no host required) and starts driving its
display, pads, encoders, and buttons from the Pi directly.

  Connection
    USB-A to USB-B cable from any Pi port to the Push 2's "Computer"
    USB port. The Push 2's main power connector also needs to be in.
    On boot Compa logs "Push 2 connected" and "Push 2 display active"
    when the surface is ready.

  Mode auto-tracking
    The Push 2 surface re-roles to match whichever device-workspace tab
    is focused on the Compa touchscreen:
      Compa tab            Push 2 mode
      ----------------     ----------------
      Control              control
      Keys                 keys
      Pattern / Sequence   pattern
      DJ (SP only)         dj
      Looper (SP only)     looper
    When you switch tabs on Compa or change the focused device, the
    Push 2 lighting and dispatch shift in lockstep.


-- Push 2: control mode --

Lights the 8x8 pad grid with the focused device's banks of pads. Pressing
a Push 2 pad triggers the mapped sample on the device. The Layout button
cycles between two arrangements per device.

  P-6 control mode (8 banks of 6 pads = 48 pads):
    Layout 0 — row-per-bank (default)
      All 8 banks visible at once. Each row holds one bank: cols 0-5 =
      pads 1-6, cols 6-7 are blank. Bank 1 is the top row, Bank 8 the
      bottom. No pad-page paging needed.

    Layout 1 — quadrants
      Four 4x4 quadrants, two banks per Push 2 page. Each bank's six
      pads occupy the top 2 rows and leftmost 3 cols of its quadrant
      (mirrors the P-6 hardware's 2x3 pad arrangement). Octave Up/Down
      pages between banks 1-4 and banks 5-8.

  SP-404 MK2 control mode (10 banks of 16 pads = 160 pads):
    Layout 0 — 2-row strips (default)
      Four banks per page, two rows per bank. Bank A is at the TOP of
      each page, Bank D at the BOTTOM. Within each strip, the upper
      Push 2 row is SP rows 1-2 (pads 1-8), the lower row is SP rows
      3-4 (pads 9-16). Octave Up/Down pages A-D / E-H / I-J.

    Layout 1 — quadrants
      Four banks per page, each bank in a full 4x4 quadrant matching
      the SP's own pad face. TL=A, TR=B, BL=C, BR=D, with pad 1 at the
      top-left of each quadrant. Octave Up/Down pages A-D / E-H / I-J.

  Layout button
    Cycles available layouts for the focused device. The Layout LED
    lights bright in control mode when more than one layout is on
    offer. Other modes leave it dim.

  Octave Up / Octave Down
    In control mode, these page through the device's bank windows
    (paging applies whenever the current layout shows fewer banks
    than the device has). LEDs dim when only one page exists.

  Pad flash on incoming notes
    When the focused device plays one of its pads — from the device's
    own hardware press, its sequencer, or any other source — Compa
    receives the MIDI echo and flashes the matching Push 2 pad bright
    white for as long as the device holds the note. Empty pads (no
    sample loaded) don't echo MIDI from the device, so they don't
    flash.

  Bottom select buttons (SP-404 only)
    In control mode, the bottom-row select buttons 1-5 act as the
    SP-404 bus selector: B1, B2, B3, B4, IN. The active bus lights in
    its bus color (red, blue, green, yellow, orange); the others stay
    dim. Slots 6-8 are unmapped.


-- Push 2: keys mode --

Plays the focused device chromatically through the Push 2 pad grid.

  Pad layout
    In chromatic scale, each row offsets +5 semitones from the row
    below (Ableton-Live note layout). In any other scale, every pad
    plays an in-scale note (no off-scale gaps); rows offset +3 scale
    degrees.

  Header status
    Shows the active KEYS root + scale name + the actual playable
    range (e.g. "C2-F#5") computed from the layout in use.

  Held-note overlay
    When you hold a Push 2 pad (or chord), the held note name(s)
    replace the BPM in the display centerpiece so you can see exactly
    what's sounding without checking the device.

  Octave Up / Octave Down
    Transpose the layout by 12 semitones at a time.

  Nav-Up / Nav-Down
    Cycle scale (chromatic, major, minor, min/maj pentatonic, blues,
    dorian, mixolydian, harmonic minor).

  Nav-Left / Nav-Right
    Step root pitch class -1 / +1.


-- Push 2: pattern mode (overlay sequencer) --

Compa's pattern mode is an OVERLAY sequencer — its own grid that
fires samples on the focused device via MIDI but never writes to
the device's own pattern memory. Bank/pattern switches on Compa
re-target which samples the next step plays without touching what
the SP-404 or P-6 has stored internally. Set up your kits on the
device, then perform overlay sequences on top, switching banks
and patterns on the fly during playback.

Driven by Compa's internal master clock (independent of the
device's clock so tempo stays rock-solid). The Push 2 surface
splits into:

  8×8 pad grid       Step cells. Row 7 (top) = first visible pad,
                     row 0 (bottom) = 8th visible pad. Cols are
                     8 step columns. Tap to toggle a step. P-6
                     uses 6 of 8 rows; SP uses 8 of 16 with octave
                     paging.

  Bottom select      Bank selector (replaces the old top pad row).
                     Active bank in its bank-palette color, others
                     dim white. Tap to switch banks live.

  Top select         Pattern launchers 1-8 within the active 8-pat
                     window. Active pattern bright in device theme
                     color, others dim. Nav-Left/Right pages
                     through 1-8 / 9-16 / etc.

  Push 2 display     Sequencer overview — full tracks × all-steps
                     grid showing the pattern's whole shape. The
                     active 8-step × 8-pad window outlines in the
                     device color so you always see which slice
                     the pads are editing. Playhead column lights
                     while playing. Status line at the bottom
                     reads Bank · Pat · Step · note value · Pads
                     page · Swing %.

  Page Left / Right
    Pages the 8-step window. LEDs dim cyan when more than one
    step page exists.

  Octave Up / Down
    Pages the 8-pad window for devices with > 8 pads. Up scrolls
    to upper-numbered pads (SP pads 1-8 at the top of the
    physical face), Down scrolls to lower (pads 9-16).

  Double Loop
    Cycles pattern length 16 → 32 → 64 → 16 steps, extending with
    empty cells. Bright pink LED in pattern mode.

  Duplicate
    Doubles pattern length AND copies the existing content into
    the new second half — same beat plays twice in a row.

  Convert / Fixed Length
    Step-resolution zoom. Convert halves the step duration
    (1/4 → 1/8 → 1/16 → 1/32) keeping notes on the same beats and
    adding sub-step cells between them — for drawing fine rhythms
    like 1/32 hi-hat rolls. Fixed Length is the inverse (zoom
    out). Bright cyan LEDs in pattern mode.

  Repeat / Accent (nudge)
    Rotate the entire pattern one step earlier (Repeat) or later
    (Accent). Useful for re-aligning a freshly-written pattern
    with the downbeat. Cyan LEDs in pattern mode.

  Swing encoder (dedicated knob to the left of the display)
    Adjusts the overlay sequencer's swing 0-50%. Even-indexed
    steps fire on the beat; odd-indexed steps are delayed by
    `swing %` of one step's worth of ticks. Status line shows
    "Sw N%" when non-zero.

  Encoders 1-2 (top row, leftmost)
    Pattern remix knobs — performance shuffle controls.
      Encoder 1: density. Each detent re-rolls every step in the
        pattern at the knob's density level (0% = empty, 100% =
        every cell on).
      Encoder 2: velocity spread. Re-rolls velocities of every
        active step within a wider window as you turn.
    Use them mid-performance to morph or recover a pattern.

  Quantize
    Normalizes every active step's velocity to 100.

  New
    Clears every step in the current pattern's grid. Two-press
    safety: first press lights the New button red and pops a
    "CLEAR PATTERN? press NEW again to confirm (3)" overlay on
    the Push 2 display with a 3-second countdown. Second press
    inside the window actually clears.

  Play
    Toggles the overlay sequencer + the focused device's transport.
    First press starts both; second press stops both. Auto-record
    is suppressed while pattern mode is active so Play just plays.

  Record
    Toggles the Compa recorder (start/stop a take of the overlay
    sequencer's audio output). Metadata captures BPM + active
    pattern. Independent of Play.

  Stop Clip
    Stops the overlay sequencer immediately.

  Step grids persist
    Each (device, pattern) step grid is saved to
    sessions/compa_step_grids.json on shutdown and reloaded on the
    next launch, so overlay-sequencer data survives a restart.


-- Push 2: DJ mode (SP-404 only) --

The pad grid maps to the SP's DJ-mode action set (5 columns x 2 rows
= Decks A and B). Header status shows the current crossfader position
"Crossfade N/127" for live reference.

  Touch strip in DJ mode
    Acts as the SP-404 crossfader (CC8 on Ch1).


-- Push 2: looper mode (SP-404 only) --

Visual layout for the SP-404 looper actions. The header shows the
labeled slots: REC, OVERDUB, STOP, DELETE, UNDO, REDO. Pad triggers
are wired up when Roland publishes a confirmed CC map for the looper.


-- Push 2: encoders + buttons --

  Tempo encoder (leftmost)
    Nudges Compa's master clock BPM by 0.1 BPM per detent (or 1.0
    with Shift held).

  Master encoder
    Master volume placeholder. A real implementation lands when
    Compa's master mixer ships.

  Swing encoder
    Pattern-mode swing amount placeholder.

  8 main encoders (top row)
    Drive the focused device's encoder page on the touchscreen. Top
    select buttons 1-N jump directly to encoder page N. The current
    page lights bright white in the top row; available pages dim
    amber.

  Touch strip (outside DJ mode)
    Sends CC 1 (mod wheel) on the focused device's main channel. Use
    it for filter sweeps, expression, or any synth parameter that
    accepts mod wheel.

  Transport buttons
    Play / Stop Clip / Record drive Compa's transport for the focused
    device. Play in pattern mode also gates the Compa step sequencer.

  Tab-jump buttons
    Note    -> Keys tab
    Session -> Session screen
    Browse  -> Files browser
    Device  -> Control tab
    New     -> Add chain step (chain tab) or clear pattern grid
                (pattern tab)
    Mute    -> Toggle mute on the active SP bus (CC 7 0/100 with last
                non-zero stored for restore)


== KEYBOARD SHORTCUTS ==

Compa supports keyboard shortcuts for quick navigation and control.
A USB or Bluetooth keyboard can be connected to the Pi.

  F1          Switch to Session screen
  F2          Switch to Control screen
  F3          Switch to Pattern screen
  F4          Switch to Record screen
  F5          Switch to Sample screen
  F6          Switch to Radio screen
  F7          Switch to Help screen
  F8          Switch to Settings screen
  Space       Toggle transport (play/stop) on focused device
  R           Toggle recording on/off
  A           Toggle auto-record mode
  M           Toggle mouse mode
  F12         Take a screenshot (saved to ~/compa/screenshots/)
  SIGUSR1     Save the current Push 2 display frame to
                ~/compa/screenshots/ (kill -USR1 <compa-pid>)
                Equivalent to the Push 2 capture button in
                Settings > SCREENSHOTS.


== AUDIO ROUTING IN DETAIL ==

Source Selection
  On the Record screen, tap the IN selector to choose which device
  to record from. The options include every connected USB audio
  device and the radio stream.

Device-to-Device Routing
  In Settings > Audio Routing, you can route audio between any two
  connected devices. This is useful for resampling: play a pattern
  on one device and record its output directly into another.

Sample Rate Conversion
  Compa automatically converts between sample rates when routing
  audio between devices. The conversion is transparent:
    48 kHz to 44.1 kHz (e.g., SP-404 to P-6)
    44.1 kHz to 48 kHz (e.g., P-6 to SP-404)
  No manual configuration is needed.

Radio Audio Path
  Radio streams play through the HDMI audio output on the Pi. USB
  audio recording is handled on a separate path. This means you can
  monitor radio on your speakers while simultaneously recording from
  a USB device without crosstalk or routing conflicts.


== FORMAT CONVERSION REFERENCE ==

When exporting samples, Compa converts audio to the format required
by the target device or software.

Roland P-6
  Format:      WAV
  Sample Rate: 44100 Hz
  Bit Depth:   16-bit
  Channels:    Mono (left channel used if source is stereo)

Roland SP-404 MK2
  Format:      WAV
  Sample Rate: 48000 Hz
  Bit Depth:   16-bit
  Channels:    Stereo
  Destination: IMPORT folder on the SP-404 SD card

Akai MPC / Force
  Format:      XPM drum program
  Samples:     WAV files formatted per MPC specifications
  Transfer:    Network share or USB file transfer

Ableton Live
  Format:      ADG Drum Rack preset
  Samples:     WAV files referenced by the .adg file
  Location:    Samba share on the Pi (accessible from Mac or PC)


== HARDWARE REQUIREMENTS ==

Raspberry Pi
  Minimum: Pi 3B+ (quad-core 1.4 GHz, 1 GB RAM)
  Recommended: Pi 4 or Pi 5 for best performance
  The Pi must have at least one free USB port per device

Display
  Recommended: 7-inch HDMI touchscreen at 800x480 or higher
  Any HDMI display works, but touch input requires a compatible
  touchscreen. Without touch, use a mouse and keyboard.

USB Cables
  Each device needs a USB cable from the Pi to the device. The cable
  must be data-capable. Charge-only cables will not work. If a device
  is not detected, try a different cable.

Power Supply
  Use the official Raspberry Pi power supply rated at 2.5A or higher.
  Underpowered supplies cause USB device dropouts and audio glitches.
  If connecting multiple power-hungry devices, consider a powered USB
  hub.


== INSTALLATION AND SETUP ==

Step 1: Flash the Operating System
  Download Raspberry Pi OS Lite (64-bit) from the official Raspberry
  Pi website. Use the Raspberry Pi Imager to flash it onto a microSD
  card. Boot the Pi and complete initial configuration (Wi-Fi,
  locale, SSH if desired).

Step 2: Clone the Repository
  Connect the Pi to the internet and clone the Compa repository:
    git clone <repo-url> ~/compa

Step 3: Create Virtual Environment and Install Dependencies
  Navigate to the Compa directory and set up a Python virtual
  environment:
    cd ~/compa
    python3 -m venv venv
    source venv/bin/activate
    pip install -r requirements.txt

Step 4: Enable the Systemd Service
  Compa includes a systemd service file for automatic startup:
    sudo cp compa.service /etc/systemd/system/
    sudo systemctl enable compa
    sudo systemctl start compa
  After this, Compa launches automatically every time the Pi boots.

Step 5: Configure Samba Share
  To access recordings and exports from a Mac or PC on the same
  network, install and configure Samba:
    sudo apt install samba
  Edit /etc/samba/smb.conf to share the ~/compa directory. Restart
  the Samba service. The share appears in your network browser as
  a shared folder.


== HOT-PLUG BEHAVIOR ==

Compa scans for USB device changes every 5 seconds. You can plug in
or unplug devices at any time without restarting the application.

Device Connection
  When a new device is plugged in, Compa detects it within 5 seconds,
  identifies it by USB descriptor, configures the appropriate audio
  and MIDI settings, and adds it to the navigation bar.

Device Disconnection
  When a device is unplugged, Compa removes it from the navigation
  bar and releases its audio and MIDI resources. If the removed
  device was the focused device, focus automatically switches to
  another connected device (if any).

No Restart Required
  Hot-plug is fully supported. You never need to restart Compa or
  reboot the Pi to add or remove devices.


== RECORDING WORKFLOWS ==

Basic Manual Recording
  1. Go to the Record screen (F4)
  2. Tap IN to select the device you want to record from
  3. Press R or tap the Record button to start recording
  4. Press R again to stop
  5. The take appears in the take list on the right

Threshold Recording
  1. Go to Settings (F8) and set the threshold level
  2. Go to the Record screen (F4)
  3. Tap the T button to enable threshold mode
  4. Recording starts automatically when signal exceeds threshold
  5. Recording stops after the configured silence duration

Auto-Record with Transport
  1. Press A to enable auto-record
  2. Start playback on your device
  3. Compa begins recording automatically
  4. Stop playback on your device
  5. Compa stops recording and saves the take

Recall Buffer Capture
  1. Realize you just heard something great but were not recording
  2. Go to the Record screen (F4)
  3. Tap Recall to save the last 60 seconds of audio
  4. The captured audio appears as a new take

Radio Capture
  1. Go to the Radio screen (F6)
  2. Browse genres and select a station
  3. When you hear something interesting, tap Capture
  4. The last 60 seconds of radio audio are saved as a WAV file


== SAMPLE EDITING WORKFLOWS ==

Trimming a Recording
  1. Go to the Sample screen (F5)
  2. Open the file browser and select a recording
  3. Drag the start and end markers on the waveform
  4. Tap Trim to remove everything outside the selection

Auto-Slicing a Loop
  1. Load a loop on the Sample screen
  2. Tap Auto-Slice
  3. Adjust sensitivity until slices land on the transients
  4. Each slice is saved as a separate file
  5. Export individual slices or the entire set

Normalizing for Consistent Levels
  1. Load a sample on the Sample screen
  2. Select the region you want to normalize (or select all)
  3. Tap Normalize
  4. The peak level is brought to 0 dBFS

Exporting to a Device
  1. Edit and prepare your sample on the Sample screen
  2. Tap Export
  3. Choose the target: P-6, SP-404, MPC, or Ableton
  4. Compa converts the format and transfers the file


== KIT BUILDING WORKFLOWS ==

Building a Drum Kit
  1. Go to Kit Builder (tap the Kit Builder tab in the nav bar)
  2. Tap pad A1 to select it
  3. Tap Load and browse to your kick drum sample
  4. Repeat for each pad: snare on A2, hi-hat on A3, etc.
  5. Use banks B through H for additional sounds

Exporting to Akai MPC or Force
  1. Build your kit as described above
  2. Tap Export > XPM
  3. Compa generates the .xpm drum program file
  4. Transfer to your MPC or Force via network or USB

Exporting to Ableton Live
  1. Build your kit as described above
  2. Tap Export > ADG
  3. The .adg file and samples are saved to the Samba share
  4. On your Mac or PC, open the network share
  5. Drag the .adg file into an Ableton Live session


== TROUBLESHOOTING ==

Device Not Detected
  - Verify the USB cable is data-capable (not charge-only)
  - Try a different USB port on the Pi
  - Check that the power supply is rated at 2.5A or higher
  - Wait at least 5 seconds for the scan cycle to detect the device

Audio Glitches or Dropouts
  - Use the official Raspberry Pi power supply
  - Close unnecessary background processes on the Pi
  - If routing between devices, ensure both are stable
  - Consider a powered USB hub for multiple devices

Touchscreen Not Responding Accurately
  - Go to Settings (F8) and run Touch Calibration
  - Follow the on-screen prompts to recalibrate

Radio Not Playing
  - Verify the Pi has an active internet connection
  - Check that the HDMI audio output is enabled in Pi settings
  - Try a different radio station

Samba Share Not Visible
  - Verify Samba is installed and running on the Pi
  - Check that your Mac or PC is on the same network
  - Review /etc/samba/smb.conf for correct share configuration

MIDI Clock Not Syncing
  - Go to Settings > MIDI Clock Relay
  - Verify a master device is selected
  - Ensure all devices are set to receive external clock


== FILE LOCATIONS ==

Compa stores its data in the following directories on the Pi:

  ~/compa/recordings/    Audio recordings and takes
  ~/compa/backups/       Device backup archives
  ~/compa/exports/       Exported samples and kits
  ~/compa/screenshots/   Screenshots taken with F12
  ~/compa/sessions/      Session files with notes and state
  ~/compa/radio/         Captured radio audio files


== TIPS AND BEST PRACTICES ==

- Always use data-capable USB cables. Charge-only cables are the most
  common source of connection problems.

- Keep the recall buffer in mind. Even if you forget to press record,
  the last 60 seconds are always available.

- Use threshold recording for hands-free capture. Set it up before a
  jam session and let Compa handle the recording automatically.

- Export directly to your device when possible. Compa handles format
  conversion so you do not need to worry about sample rates or bit
  depths.

- Back up your device data regularly using the Session screen. Backups
  are small and fast, and they protect against accidental data loss.

- Use the Kit Builder to prepare drum kits before a session. Having
  kits ready to load on your MPC or in Ableton saves time during
  creative work.

- The MIDI clock relay eliminates the need for a separate sync box.
  Designate one device as master and let Compa distribute clock to
  the rest.

- Take advantage of the multi-device hub. With four USB ports, you
  can have a P-6, SP-404, and MPC all connected and switching between
  them with a single tap.


== END OF MANUAL ==


== MONITOR OUTPUT (EXPERIMENTAL) ==
The OUT button on session cards sets a device as your headphone output.
When you tap a different card, audio routes through the Pi to your
headphone device so you can hear it.

NOTE: Audio pass-through works best on Pi 4 or Pi 5 where USB devices
are on separate buses. On Pi 3B, the shared USB bus causes glitches
when routing audio between two USB devices simultaneously.

Pi 3B workaround: use analog cables to monitor multiple devices.
Run one device headphone out into another device EXT SOURCE input.
